For an application, creating and debugging Menus, Forms and reports using Oracle Forms 
and Report Builder.  
a) Designing Forms and handling insert, delete, modify through Database 
Connectivity. 
Using Large objects, create and assign acceptance format for the Employees in Bus 
Management System 
Form Builder Tool 
Open the "Form Builder" tool. 
Welcome window 
You will get the Welcome to the Form Builder window. 
Use the data Block Wizard, ( Tools  Data block wizard ) 
You will get  welcome to the the data block wizard 
Next  table or view  Enter the table name EMP 
Refresh  provide connection details ( user name , password and host string ) 
Move all the columns from available columns to database items 
Data block name ( let it be same as table name  )   create data block then call layout 
wizard  
finish. 
We are done with datablock wizard , You will get welcome to layout wizard 
Canvas ( new canvas )  Type content 
Next  Move all items from available items to displayed 
items  Next  Next  Select form 
Frame tile Emp Details Next  Finish 
We are done with layout wizard 
Go to  File - Save As - Create new folder in desktop  with the name MY_FORMS 
Save the  file with the name  EMP_FORM.fmb 
Important is to observe the object navigator ( Press F3 ) 
You can see under forms  your form name i.e. EMP_FORM 
Under form, data block is created i.e. EMP ( Data block refers to table ) 
Under data block, i.e. you find Item ( Item refers to columns in the table ) 
Under canvases, you can see a canvas 
Under Canvas, you can see the frame 
Understand hierarchy. It is simple. 
Now, Compile the form. 
In the Menu, Go to Program -   Compile Module ( Ctrl + T ) 
In your desktop, in your folder MY_FORMS , Observe  .fmx file is generated. 
Note: 
When we compile fmb file,  fmx file is generated. 
To run the form, start the listener /  Start OC4J listener 
Now, Run the form 
Click on Run Form Icon. 
It will prompt to install Jinitiator, Install it. 
Your Form is opened in the browser. 
Now, Enter values in few fields like  empno, ename ,sal , deptno, click on save. 
You get a message, Transaction complete: 1 record applied and saved. 
Now check your EMP table in the database,  you can see the new row is inserted. 
To look at all the rows in the emp table, click on execute query 
To look at the next row click on next record. 
To look at previous row click on previous record button 
To change the salary of ALLEN from 1600 to 2000. 
Go to ALLEN record, change the value of sal field to 2000. 
Click on save button. 
To delete the row of empno 111, traverse the record, click on delete button and save. 
Look at the EMP  table , empno 111 is deleted. 
To see the details of all the employees working in deptno 20. 
Click on Enter query 
Enter deptno 20 
Click on Execute query 
Now, when you click on next record, you will get only the records working in deptno 20. 
b)     
  Designing Forms and handling insert, delete, modify through Database Connectivity. 
Using Large objects, create and assign acceptance format for the Employees Working in Bus 
Management System 
Procedure: 
Open the report builder tool Welcome to the Report Builder  Select Use the report 
wizard  OK   Welcome to the report wizard  Next  Create both Web and Paper 
Layout Next Title -- EMP Details  , Choose the report style as Tabular Next  SQL 
Query  Next   Data Source Definition --  Select * from emp  Next  provide the 
username, password and database details  Connect  Move all the fields from Available 
Fields to Displayed Fields Next Next Next Select Predefined template -- 
Blue  Next  Finish. 
This is how your report looks like. 
Save the report with the name EMP.rdf 
Go to Tools  Object Navigator  ( Short cut F5 ) 
Double click on the Data Model . 
Data Model of the report is displayed. 
In the data model, we can see the query. 
Query results in group. 
Group is collection of columns. 
In our report, the name of the query is Q_1. 
The name of the group is G_EMPNO. 
Observer the group contains columns like EMPNO, ENAME, JOB, MGR  etc. 
Double click on query Q_1 ,  the query used in developing the report is displayed. 
In the Object Navigator, when we expand the Data Model, we can see the Query, Group and 
list of the columns in the group. 
In the Object Navigator, expand the Paper Layout. 
It contains three sections. 
1) Header Section 
2) Main Section 
3) Trailer Section 
Expand the Header Section, there is nothing found. 
Expand the Trailer Section, there is nothing found. 
Expand the Main section, We can see Body and Margin. 
Expand Body, we will find M_G_EMPNO_GRPFR. It is called as Group Frame. 
It groups all the objects belong the query. Hence it is called Group Frame. It is the first frame 
that is created by the wizard. The name of the frame always ends with GRPFR ( stands for 
Group Frame ). 
Under Group frame we find Header frame. 
This frame name ends with _HDR. 
This frame is used to group the column headings of the report. 
The next object is repeating frame. We can identify the repeating frame in two ways. 
Repeating  always have an arrow on the frame. 
The name of the repeating frame always starts with R_ 
Repeating frame represents a group in the query. 
There is one-to-one relationship between group and repeating frame. 
The last objects are field objects. These objects reside inside the repeating frame. 
Field objects display database columns. The field names start with F_ . The fields must be 
displayed in the repeating frame that corresponds to the group they are in. 
When we are creating the layout manually from the scratch we have to be very careful that 
the fields are placed in the correct repeating frames. 
Let us look at another similar example. 
Lets us create another report using wizard based on DEPT table 
Open the report builder tool 
File New  Report   Use the report Wizard  OK Next Create both Web and 
Paper Layout Next  Title -- Dept Details   Style -- Tabular SQL Query Next  
Data Source Definition -- Select * from dept  Next  Enter username, password and 
database details  Connect move all fields from Available fields to displayed 
fields  Next Next Next  Predefined template  -- Green Next  Finish 
This is how our report looks like. 
Save the report with the name DEPT.rdf 
Similar to our previous example, in the Object Navigator ( F5) , double click on the Data 
Model, we find query, query results in group. Group contains fields. 
In the Object Navigator, expand paper layout, under main section, we find Group frame, 
Header frame and Repeating frame.  Repeating frame contains fields. This is same as our 
previous example. 
In the Object Navigator,  select Paper Layout,  Go to Tools Report Editor, we get the paper 
layout of the report. This layout is designed by the wizard. 
Lets us understand the layout designed by the wizard. 
Select all the fields ( ctrl + A ) move the layout to the centre by using arrow keys in the 
keyboard. 
Click on any field and select the outer most frame by clicking "select parent frame"  button ( 
two times) 
Expand outermost frame to all the directions by using mouse. 
Select column heading loc , select its parent frame by clicking "Select parent frame" button. 
Click on Flex Off button. 
Move the header frame towards up (by using arrow keys ). 
Click on LOC field, select its parent frame and expand to all directions by using mouse. 
Select LOC field and move the field towards right by using arrow key. 
Select DEPTNO field and move the field towards left by using arrow key. 
By looking at the above layout, we can understand arrangement of frames done by the 
wizard. 
All the fields in the repeating frame will be repeated for every row  in the query. 
The changes which we have done to the layout is just for our understanding purpose. 
Save the changes ( File  Save ) 
Run the report  ( Program  Run Paper Layout ) 
Look at the output below 
In the output, we see big distance between the records.  Because in the layout the width of the 
repeating frame is more. 
Let us decrease the width of the repeating frame in the paper layout. 
Save the report. 
Run the report. 
Look at the output below 
Observe, there is noticeable distance between the rows now. 
RESULT 
Designing Forms and handling insert, delete, modify through Database Connectivity 
using Oracle Form builder has done successfully. 
